Welcome to Caterpillar's documentation!
=======================================

*caterpillar* is a powerful python framework designed to navigate through structured
binary data. This framework operates as a declarative parser and builder using standard
Python class definitions and annotations.

Whetting Your Appetite
----------------------

If you're involved in reverse engineering or working with custom or proprietary file
formats, there often comes a need to structure data in a way that is both easy and
efficient.

ðŸ› lets you define standard structs with a fixed size while also supporting dynamic
structs that adjust their size based on the current context. This framework enables you
to write complex structures in a compact and readable manner.

.. tab-set::

   .. tab-item:: Default Syntax

      .. code-block::
         :caption: Simple example of a custom struct

         @struct
         class Format:
            magic: b"Foo"                       # constant values
            name: CString(...)                  # \x00-terminated String without a fixed length
            value: le + uint16                  # little endian encoding
            entries: be + CString[uint32::]     # arrays with big-endian prefixed length


   .. tab-item:: Extended Syntax (>=2.8.0)

      .. code-block::
         :caption: Simple example of a custom struct with type annotations in-place

         @struct
         class Format:
            magic:   f[bytes, b"Foo"]                     # constant values
            name:    cstr_t                               # \x00-terminated String without a fixed length
            value:   f[int, le + uint16]                  # little endian encoding
            entries: f[list[str], be + CString[uint32::]] # arrays with big-endian prefixed length



.. admonition:: Hold up, wait a minute!

   How does this even work? Is this still Python? Answers to these questions are given
   in the general :ref:`introduction`.

Working with defined classes is as straightforward as working with normal classes. *All
constant values are created automatically!*


>>> obj = Format(name="Hello, World!", value=10, entries=["Bar", "Baz"])
>>> print(obj)
Format(magic=b'Foo', name='Hello, World!', value=10, entries=['Bar', 'Baz'])

Packing and unpacking have never been easier:

>>> pack(obj)
b'FooHello, World!\x00\n\x00\x00\x00\x00\x02Bar\x00Baz\x00'
>>> unpack(Format, _)
Format(magic=b'Foo', name='Hello, World!', value=10, entries=['Bar', 'Baz'])


- What about documentation?
  There are specialized options created only for documentation purposes, so you don't
  have to worry about documenting fields. Just apply the documentation as usual.

- You want to optimize memory space?
  No problem! It is possible to shrink the memory space occupied by unpacked objects up
  to 4 times. More information are provided when discussing available configuration
  :ref:`options`.

- And *YES*, this library tries to enforce strong typing wherever appliacable and supported.
  More on that topic later in the tutorial. ...ref...


Where to start?
---------------

It is recommended to take a look at the explanation of the internal :ref:`datamodel` to get
in touch with all forms of structs. Additionally, there's a detailed documentation on
what configuration options can be used. Alternatively you can follow the :ref:`tutorial-index`.

.. grid:: 1 2 3 5

   .. grid-item-card:: Tutorial
      :link: tutorial/index.html

      User-friendly tutorial to *caterpillar*.

   .. grid-item-card:: Reference
      :link: reference/index.html

      Information about the internal data model of *caterpillar*.

   .. grid-item-card:: Library
      :link: library/index.html

      Source code documentation generated by Sphinx.

   .. grid-item-card:: Development
      :link: development/index.html

      Changelog and contributing information.

   .. grid-item-card:: C Reference
      :link: reference/capi/extension.html

      Caterpillar C API Reference and extension development.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :hidden:
   :numbered: 4
   :caption: Contents:

   installing/index.rst
   tutorial/index.rst
   reference/index.rst
   library/index.rst

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3
   :hidden:

   development/index.rst


.. seealso::
   * `Github Source <https://github.com/MatrixEditor/caterpillar>`_
   * `Github Issues <https://github.com/MatrixEditor/caterpillar/issues>`_
   * `Discussions <https://github.com/MatrixEditor/caterpillar/discussions>`_

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`search`
